The President: Thank you.
Everybody, please
have a seat.
We've got some
work to do here.
(laughter)
This is not all
fun and games.
Welcome to the White
House, everybody.
Today, we celebrate
extraordinary Americans who
have lifted our spirits,
strengthened our union,
pushed us toward progress.
I always love doing this
event, but this is a
particularly
impressive class.
We've got innovators
and artists.
Public servants, rabble
rousers, athletes, renowned
character actors -- like
the guy from Space Jam.
(laughter)
We pay tribute to those
distinguished individuals
with our nation's highest
civilian honor -- the
Presidential
Medal of Freedom.
Now, let me tell you a
little bit about each of them.
First, we came close to
missing out on Bill and
Melinda Gates'
incredible partnership.
Because apparently Bill's
opening line was, "Do you
want to go out two weeks
from this coming Saturday?"
(laughter)
He's good with
computers, but --
(laughter)
Fortunately, Melinda
believes in second chances.
And the world is
better for it.
For two decades, the Gates
Foundation has worked to
provide lifesaving medical
care to millions -- boosting
clean water supplies,
improving education for our
children, rallying
aggressive international
action on climate change,
cutting childhood mortality
in half.
The list could go on.
These two have donated more
money to charitable causes
than anyone, ever.
Many years ago, Melinda's
mom told her an old saying:
"To know that even one life
has breathed easier because
you lived -- that is
success." By this and just
about any other measure, few
in human history have been
more successful than these
two impatient optimists.
Frank Gehry has never let
popular acclaim reverse his
impulse to defy convention.
"I was an outsider from the
beginning," he says, "so for
better or worse, I thrived
on it." The child of poor
Jewish immigrants, Frank
grew up in Los Angeles, and
throughout his life he
embraced the spirit of a
city defined by
an open horizon.
He's spent his life
rethinking shapes and
mediums, seemingly the force
of gravity itself; the idea
of what architecture could
be he decided to upend --
constantly repurposing every
material available, from
titanium to a
paper towel tube.
He's inspiring our next
generation through his
advocacy for arts
education in our schools.
From the Guggenheim, to
Bilbao, to Chicago's
Millennium Park -- our
hometown -- to his home in
Santa Monica, which I
understand caused some
consternation among
his neighbors --
(laughter)
- Frank's work teaches us
that while buildings may be
sturdy and fixed to the
ground, like all great art,
they can lift our spirits.
They can soar and
broaden our horizons.
When an undergraduate from
rural Appalachia first set
foot on the National Mall
many years ago, she was
trying to figure out a way
to show that "war is not
just a victory or a loss,"
but "about individual
lives." She considered how
the landscape might shape
that message, rather than
the other way around.
The project that Maya Lin
designed for her college
class earned her a B+ --
(laughter)
-- and a permanent place
in American history.
(laughter)
So all of you B+
students out there.
(laughter)
The Vietnam Veterans
Memorial has changed the way
we think about monuments,
but also about how we think
about sacrifice, and
patriotism, and ourselves.
Maya has given us more than
just places for remembering
-- she has created places
for us to make new memories.
Her sculptures, chapels, and
homes are "physical act[s]
of poetry," each reminding
us that the most important
element in art or
architecture is human emotion.
Three minutes before
Armstrong and Aldrin touched
down on the moon, Apollo
11's lunar lander alarms
triggered -- red and yellow
lights across the board.
Our astronauts didn't
have much time.
But thankfully, they
had Margaret Hamilton.
A young MIT scientist -- and
a working mom in the '60s --
Margaret led the team that
created the onboard flight
software that allowed the
Eagle to land safely.
And keep in mind that,
at this time, software
engineering wasn't
even a field yet.
There were no textbooks to
follow, so, as Margaret
says, "There was no choice
but to be pioneers."
Luckily for us, Margaret
never stopped pioneering.
And she symbolizes the
generation of unsung women
who helped send
humankind into space.
Her software architecture
echoes in countless
technologies today.
And her example speaks of
the American spirit of
discovery that exists in
every little girl and little
boy who know that somehow,
to look beyond the heavens
is to look deep within
ourselves -- and to figure
out just what is possible.
If Wright is flight and
Edison is light, then Hopper
is code.
Born in 1906, Rear Admiral
Grace Murray Hopper followed
her mother into mathematics,
earned her PhD from Yale,
and set out on a long
and storied career.
At age 37, and a full 15
pounds below military
guidelines, the gutsy and
colorful Grace joined the
Navy and was sent to work on
one of the first computers,
Harvard's "Mark One." She
saw beyond the boundaries of
the possible, and invented
the first compiler, which
allowed programs to be
written in regular language
and then translated for
computers to understand.
While the women who
pioneered software were
often overlooked, the most
prestigious award for young
computer scientists
now bear her name.
From cell phones to cyber
command, we can thank Grace
Hopper for opening
programming to millions more
people, helping to usher
in the information age and
profoundly shaping
our digital world.
Speaking of really
smart people --
(laughter)
-- in the summer of 1950, a
young University of Chicago
physicist found himself
at Los Alamos National Laboratory.
Dick Garwin was there, he
said, because Chicago paid
its faculty for nine months
but his family ate for 12.
So by the next summer,
Dick had helped create the
hydrogen bomb.
And for the rest of his
life, he dedicated himself
to reducing the
threat of nuclear war.
Dick's not only an architect
of the atomic age.
Ever since he was a
Cleveland kid tinkering with
his father's movie
projectors, he's never met a
problem he didn't
want to solve.
Reconnaissance satellites,
the MRI, GPS technology, the
touchscreen all bear
his fingerprints.
He even patented a "mussel
washer" for shellfish --
which I haven't used.
The other stuff I have.
(laughter)
Where is he?
Dick has advised nearly
every President since
Eisenhower -- often
rather bluntly.
Enrico Fermi -- also a
pretty smart guy himself --
is said to have called Dick
"the only true genius" he
ever met.
I do want to see
this mussel washer.
(laughter)
Along with these scientists,
artists, and thinkers, we
also honor those who have
shaped our culture from the
stage and the screen.
In her long and
extraordinary career, Cicely
Tyson has not only succeeded
as an actor, she has shaped
the whole course history.
Cicely was never the
likeliest of Hollywood stars.
The daughter of immigrants
from the West Indies, she
was raised by a hardworking
and religious mother who
cleaned houses and forbade
her children to attend
the movies.
But once she got her
education and broke into the
business, Cicely made a
conscious decision not just
to say lines,
but to speak out.
"I would not accept roles,"
she said, "unless they
projected us, particularly
women, in a realistic light,
[and] dealt with us as human
beings." And from "Sounder,"
to "The Trip to Bountiful,"
to "The Autobiography of
Miss Jane Pittman," Cicely's
convictions and grace have
helped for us see the
dignity of every single
beautiful member of
the American family.
And she's just gorgeous.
(laughter and applause)
Yes, she is.
In 1973, a critic wrote of
Robert De Niro, "This kid
doesn't just act -- he takes
off into the vapors." And it
was true, his
characters are iconic.
A Sicilian father
turned New York mobster.
A mobster who runs a casino.
A mobster who needs therapy.
(laughter)
A father-in-law who is
scarier than a mobster.
(laughter)
Al Capone -- a mobster.
Robert combines dramatic
precision and, it turns out,
comedic timing with his
signature eye for detail.
And while the name De Niro
is synonymous with "tough
guy," his true gift is the
sensitivity that he brings
to each role.
This son of New York artists
didn't stop at becoming one
of the world's
greatest actors.
He's also a director, a
philanthropist, co-founder
of the Tribeca
Film Festival.
Of his tireless preparation
-- from learning the
saxophone to remaking his
body -- he once said, "I
feel I have to earn the
right to play a part." And
the result is honest and
authentic art that reveals
who we really are.
In 1976, Lorne Michaels
implored the Beatles to
reunite on his
brand new show.
In exchange, he
offered them $3,000.
(laughter)
And then he told them they
could share it equally, or
they could give
Ringo a smaller cut.
(laughter)
Which was early proof that
Lorne Michaels has a good
sense of humor.
On Saturday Night Live, he's
created a world where a band
of no-names become
comedy's biggest stars.
Where our friends the
Coneheads, and cheerleaders,
and land sharks, and
basement deadbeats, and
motivational speakers, and
an unfrozen caveman lawyer
show up, and Tom Hanks
is on "Black Jeopardy."
(laughter)
After four decades, even in
this fractured media culture
that we've got, SNL remains
appointment viewing; a
mainline into not just our
counterculture but our
culture; still a challenge
to the powerful, especially
folks like me.
And yet even after all these
years, Lorne jokes that his
tombstone should bear just
a single word that's often
found in the show's
reviews -- "uneven."
(laughter)
As a current U.S. Senator
would say: Doggone
it, Lorne - that's why
people like you.
He produced a Senator, too,
that's pretty impressive.
Ellen DeGeneres has a way
of making you laugh about
something rather
than at someone.
Except when I danced on her
show -- she laughed at me.
(laughter)
But that's okay.
It's easy to forget now,
when we've come so far,
where now marriage is equal
under the law -- just how
much courage was required
for Ellen to come out on the
most public of stages
almost 20 years ago.
Just how important it
was not just to the LGBT
community, but for all of us
to see somebody so full of
kindness and light, somebody
we liked so much, somebody
who could be our neighbor or
our colleague or our sister
challenge our own
assumptions, remind us that
we have more in common than
we realize, push our country
in the direction of justice.
What an incredible
burden that was to bear.
To risk your
career like that.
People don't do
that very often.
And then to have the
hopes of millions on
your shoulders.
But it's like Ellen says:
W all want a tortilla chip
that can support the
weight of guacamole.
Which really makes no sense
to me, but I thought would
brighten the mood, because I
was getting kind of choked up.
(laughter)
And she did pay a price --
we don't remember this.
I hadn't remembered it.
She did, for a pretty long
stretch of time --
even in Hollywood.
And yet, today, every day,
in every way, Ellen counters
what too often divides us
with the countless things
that bind us together --
inspires us to be better,
one joke, one
dance at a time.
When The Candidate wins his
race in the iconic 1972 film
of the same name, which
continues, by the way, for
those of you who haven't
seen it, and many of you are
too young -- perhaps the
best movie about what
politics is
actually like, ever.
He famously asks his
campaign manager the
reflective and revealing
question: "What do we do now?"
And like the man he played
in that movie, Robert
Redford has figured it out
and applied his talent and
charm to achieve success.
We admire Bob not just for
his remarkable acting, but
for having figured
out what to do next.
He created a platform for
independent filmmakers with
the Sundance Institute.
He has supported our
National Parks and our
natural resources as
one of the foremost
conservationists
of our generation.
He's given his unmatched
charisma to unforgettable
characters like Roy Hobbs,
Nathan Muir, and of course
the Sundance Kid,
entertaining us for more
than half a century.
As an actor, director,
producer, and as an
advocate, he has not stopped
-- and apparently drives so
fast that he had breakfast
in Napa and dinner in Salt Lake.
(laughter)
At 80 years young, Robert
Redford has no plans
to slow down.
According to a recent
headline, the movie, Sully
was the last straw.
We should never
travel with Tom Hanks.
(laughter)
I mean, you think about, you
got pirates, plane crashes,
you get marooned in airport
purgatory, volcanoes --
something happens
with Tom Hanks.
(laughter)
And yet somehow, we can't
resist going where he wants
to take us.
He's been an accidental
witness to history, a crusty
women's baseball manager, an
everyman who fell in love
with Meg Ryan three times.
(laughter)
Made it seem natural to have
a volleyball as your
best friend.
From a Philadelphia
courtroom, to Normandy's
beachheads, to the dark
side of the moon, he has
introduced us to America's
unassuming heroes.
Tom says he just saw
"ordinary guys who did the
right thing at the right
time." Well, it takes one to
know one, and "America's
Dad" has stood up to cancer
with his beloved wife, Rita.
He has championed our
veterans, supported space
exploration, and the truth
is, Tom has always saved his
best roles for real life.
He is a good man -- which is
the best title you can have.
So we got innovators,
entertainers -- three more
folks who've dedicated
themselves to public service.
In the early 1960s,
thousands of Cuban children
fled to America, seeking an
education they'd never get
back home.
And one refugee was
15-year-old named Eduardo
Padron, whose life changed
when he enrolled at Miami
Dade College.
That decision led to a
bachelor's degree, then a
Master's degree, then a PhD,
and then he had a choice --
he could go into corporate
America, or he could give
back to his alma mater.
And Eduardo made his choice
-- to create more stories
just like his.
As Miami Dade's President
since 1995, Dr. Padron has
built a "dream factory" for
one of our nation's most
diverse student bodies --
165,000 students in all.
He's one of the world's
preeminent education leaders
-- thinking out of the
box, supporting students
throughout their lives,
embodying the belief that
we're only as great
as the doors we open.
Eduardo's example is one we
all can follow -- a champion
for those who strive for the
same American Dream that
first drew him
to our shores.
When Elouise Cobell first
filed a lawsuit to recover
lands and money for her
people, she didn't set out
to be a hero.
She said, "I just
wanted...to give justice to
people that didn't have it."
And her lifelong quest to
address the mismanagement
of American Indian lands,
resources, and trust funds
wasn't about special
treatment, but the equal
treatment at the heart of
the American promise.
She fought for almost 15
years -- across three
Presidents, seven trials, 10
appearances before a federal
appeals court.
All the while, she traveled
the country some 40 weeks a
year, telling the
story of her people.
And in the end, this
graduate of a one-room
schoolhouse became
a MacArthur Genius.
She is a proud daughter of
Montana's Blackfeet Nation.
Reached ultimately a
historic victory for all
Native Americans.
Through sheer force of will
and a belief that the truth
will win out, Elouise Cobell
overcame the longest odds,
reminding us that fighting
for what is right is always
worth it.
Now, every journalist in the
room, every media critic
knows the phrase Newt
Minow coined: the "vast
wasteland." But the two
words Newt prefers we
remember from his speech to
the nation's broadcasters
are these: "public
interest." That's been the
heartbeat of his life's work
-- advocating for residents
of public housing, advising
a governor and Supreme Court
justice, cementing
presidential debates as our
national institution,
leading the FCC.
When Newt helped launch
the first communications
satellites, making
nationwide broadcasts
possible -- and eventually
GPS possible and cellphones
possible -- he predicted it
would be more important than
the moon landing.
"This will launch ideas into
space," he said, "and ideas
last longer than people." As
far as I know, he's the only
one of today's honorees who
was present on my first date
with Michelle.
(laughter)
Imagine our surprise when we
saw Newt, one of our bosses
that summer, at the movie
theater -- Do the Right Thing.
So he's been vital to
my personal interests.
(laughter)
And finally, we honor five
of the all-time greats in
sports and music.
The game of baseball has a
handful of signature sounds.
You hear the
crack of the bat.
You got the crowd singing in
the seventh inning stretch.
And you've got the
voice of Vin Scully.
Most fans listen to a game's
broadcast when they can't be
at the ballpark.
Generations of Dodger fans
brought their radios into
the stands because you
didn't want to miss one of
Vin's stories.
Most play-by-play announcers
partner with an analyst in
the booth to chat
about the action.
Vin worked alone and
talked just with us.
Since Jackie Robinson
started at second base, Vin
taught us the game and
introduced us to its players.
He narrated the improbable
years, the impossible
heroics, turned contests
into conversations.
When he heard about this
honor, Vin asked with
characteristic humility,
"Are you sure?
I'm just an old baseball
announcer." And we had to
inform him that to Americans
of all ages, you are
an old friend.
In fact, I thought about him
doing all these citations,
which would have been very
cool, but I thought we
shouldn't make him sing
for his supper like that.
(laughter)
"Up next" --
Here's how great Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar was: 1967, he
had spent a year dominating
college basketball, the NCAA
bans the dunk.
They'd didn't say it was
about Kareem, but it was
about Kareem.
(laughter)
When a sport changes its
rules to make it harder just
for you, you
are really good.
(laughter and applause)
And yet despite the rule
change, he was still the
sport's most
unstoppable force.
It's a title he'd hold for
more than two decades,
winning NBA Finals MVPs a
staggering 14 years apart.
(someone sneezes)
Bless you.
(laughter)
And as a surprisingly
similar-looking co-pilot,
Roger Murdoch, once said in
the movie, Airplane -- I
mean, we've got some great
actors here --
Space Jam, Airplane.
(laughter)
He did it all while dragging
Walton and Lanier up and
down the court
for 48 minutes.
But the reason we honor
Kareem is more than just a
pair of goggles
and the skyhook.
He stood up for his Muslim
faith when it wasn't easy
and it wasn't popular.
He's as comfortable sparring
with Bruce Lee as he is
advocating on Capitol
Hill or writing with
extraordinary eloquence
about patriotism.
Physically, intellectually,
spiritually -- Kareem is
one-of-a-kind -- an American
who illuminates both our
most basic freedoms and
our highest aspirations.
When he was five years old,
Michael Jordan nearly cut
off his big toe with an axe.
(laughter)
Back then, his handles
needed a little work.
But think -- if things had
gone differently, Air Jordan
just might never
have taken flight.
(laughter)
I mean, you don't want to
buy a shoe with one toe missing.
(laughter)
We may never have seen him
switch hands in mid-air
against the Lakers.
Or drop 63 in the Garden.
Or gut it out
in the flu game.
Or hit "the shot" three
different times -- over
Georgetown, over
Ehlo, over Russell.
We might not have seen
him take on Larry Bird in
H-O-R-S-E or lift up the
sport globally along with
the Dream Team.
Yet MJ is still more than
those moments; more than
just the best player on the
two greatest teams of all
time -- the Dream Team and
the Chicago '96 Bulls.
He's more than a logo, more
than just an Internet meme.
(laughter)
More than just a charitable
donor or a business owner
committed to diversity.
There is a reason you call
someone "the Michael Jordan
of" -- Michael Jordan of
neurosurgery, or the Michael
Jordan of rabbis, or the
Michael Jordan of outrigger
canoeing -- and they know
what you're talking about.
Because Michael Jordan
is the Michael Jordan
of greatness.
He is the definition of
somebody so good at what
they do that everybody
recognizes them.
That's pretty rare.
As a child, Diana Ross loved
singing and dancing for
family friends --
but not for free.
(laughter)
She was smart enough
to pass the hat.
And later, in Detroit's
Brewster housing projects,
she met Mary Wilson
and Florence Ballard.
Their neighbor, Smokey
Robinson, put them in front
of Berry Gordy -- and the
rest was magic -- music history.
The Supremes earned a
permanent place in the
American soundtrack.
Along with her honey voice,
her soulful sensibility,
Diana exuded glamour and
grace that filled stages
that helped to shape
the sound of Motown.
On top of becoming one
of the most successful
recording artists of all
time, raised five kids --
somehow found time to earn
an Oscar nomination for acting.
Today, from the hip-hop that
samples her, to the young
singers who've been inspired
by her, to the audiences
that still cannot get enough
of her -- Diana Ross's
influence is
inescapable as ever.
He was sprung from a
cage out on Highway 9.
A quiet kid from Jersey,
just trying to make sense of
the temples of dreams and
mystery that dotted his
hometown -- pool halls,
bars, girls and cars, altars
and assembly lines.
And for decades, Bruce
Springsteen has brought us
all along on a journey
consumed with the bargains
between ambition and
injustice, and pleasure and
pain; the simple glories
and scattered heartbreak of
everyday life in America.
To create one of his biggest
hits, he once said, "I
wanted to craft a record
that sounded like the last
record on Earth...the last
one you'd ever need to hear.
One glorious noise...then
the apocalypse." Every
restless kid in America was
given a story: "Born to
Run." He didn't stop there.
Once he told us about
himself, he told us about
everybody else.
The steelworker in
"Youngstown." The Vietnam
Vet in "Born in the
USA." The sick and the
marginalized on "The Streets
of Philadelphia." The
firefighter carrying the
weight of a reeling but
resilient nation on "The
Rising." The young soldier
reckoning with "Devils
and Dust" in Iraq.
The communities knocked down
by recklessness and greed in
the "Wrecking Ball." All of
us, with all our faults and
our failings, every color,
and class, and creed, bound
together by one defiant,
restless train rolling
toward "The Land of Hope
and Dreams." These are all
anthems of our America; the
reality of who we are, and
the reverie of
who we want to be.
"The hallmark of a rock
and roll band," Bruce
Springsteen once said, is
that "the narrative you tell
together is bigger than
anyone could have told on
your own." And for decades,
alongside the Big Man,
Little Steven, a Jersey girl
named Patti, and all the men
and women of the E Street
Band, Bruce Springsteen has
been carrying the rest of us
on his journey, asking us
all "what is the work for
us to do in our short time
here." I am the President.
But he is The Boss.
(laughter)
And pushing 70, he's still
laying down four-hour live
sets -- if you have been
at them, he is working.
"Fire-breathing rock 'n'
roll." So I thought twice
about giving him a medal
named for freedom because we
hope he remains, in his
words, a "prisoner of rock
'n' roll" for years to come.
So, I told you, this is
like a really good class.
(laughter)
Ladies and gentlemen, I want
you all to give it up for
the recipients of the 2016
Presidential Medal of Freedom.
(applause)
It is a good group.
All right.
Now we actually got
to give them medals.
So please be patient.
We are going to have my
military aide read
the citations.
Each one of them will come
up and receive the medals,
and then we'll wrap
up the program.
Okay.
Let's hit it.
Military Aide:
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
(applause)
An iconic basketball player
who revolutionized the sport
with his all-around play and
signature skyhook, Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar is a 19-time
All-Star, a 6-time world
champion, and the leading
scorer in NBA history.
Adding to his achievements
on the court he also left
his mark off of it,
advocating for civil rights,
cancer research, science
education, and social justice.
In doing so, Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar leaves a
towering legacy of
compassion, faith, and
service to others -- a
legacy based not only on the
strength and grace of his
athleticism, but on the
sharpness of his mind and
the size of his heart.
(applause)
Turk Cobell, accepting
on behalf of his mother,
Elouise C. Cobell Yellowbird Woman.
(applause)
A member of the Blackfeet
Nation, Elouise Cobell spent
her life defying the odds
and working on behalf
of her people.
As a young woman, she was
told that she wasn't capable
of understanding accounting.
So she mastered the field --
and used her expertise to
champion a lawsuit whose
historic settlement has
helped restore Tribal
homelands to her beloved
Blackfeet Nation and
many other Tribes.
Today, her tenacious and
unwavering spirit lives on
in the thousands of people
and hundreds of Tribes for
whom she fought and in all
those she taught to believe
that it is never too late to
right the wrongs of the past
and help shape
a better future.
(applause)
Ellen DeGeneres.
In a career spanning three
decades, Ellen DeGeneres has
lifted our spirits and
brought joy to our lives as
a stand-up comic, actor,
and television star.
In every role, she reminds
us to be kind to one another
and to treat people as each
of us wants to be treated.
At a pivotal moment, her
courage and candor helped
change the hearts and minds
of millions of Americans,
accelerating our Nation's
constant drive toward
equality and
acceptance for all.
Again and again, Ellen
DeGeneres has shown us that
a single individual can make
the world a more fun, more
open, more loving place --
so long as we
"just keep swimming."
(applause)
Robert De Niro.
For over 50 years, Robert De
Niro has delivered some of
screen's most memorable
performances, cementing his
place as one of the most
gifted actors of
his generation.
From "The Godfather Part II"
and "The Deer Hunter" to
"Midnight Run" and "Heat,"
his work is legendary for
its range and depth.
Relentlessly committed to
his craft, De Niro embodies
his characters, creating
rich, nuanced portraits that
reflect the heart of
the human experience.
Regardless of genre or era,
Robert De Niro continues to
demonstrate that
extraordinary skill that has
made him one of America's
most revered and
influential artists.
(applause)
Richard L. Garwin.
One of the most renowned
scientific and engineering
minds of our time,
Dr. Richard Garwin has
always answered the call to
help solve society's most
challenging problems.
He has coupled his
pioneering work in defense
and intelligence
technologies with leadership
that underscores the urgency
for humanity to control the
spread of nuclear arms.
Through his advice to
Republican and Democratic
administrations dating to
President Eisenhower, his
contributions in fundamental
research, and his inventions
that power technologies that
drive our modern world,
Richard Garwin has
contributed not only to this
Nation's security and
prosperity, but to the
quality of life for people
all over the world.
(applause)
William H. Gates III and Melinda French Gates.
Few people have had the
profound global impact of
Bill and Melinda Gates.
Through their work at the
Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, they've
demonstrated how the most
capable and fortunate among
us have a responsibility to
use their talents and
resources to tackle the
world's greatest challenges.
From helping women and girls
lift themselves and their
families out of poverty
to empowering young minds
across America, they have
transformed countless lives
with their generosity
and innovation.
Bill and Melinda Gates
continue to inspire us with
their impatient optimism
that, together, we can
remake the world
as it should be.
(applause)
Frank Gehry.
Never limited by
conventional materials,
styles, or processes, Frank
Gehry's bold and thoughtful
structures demonstrate
architecture's power to
induce wonder and
revitalize communities.
A creative mind from an
early age, he began his
career by building imaginary
homes and cities with scrap
material from his
grandfather's hardware store.
Since then, his work
continues to strike a
balance between
experimentation and
functionality, resulting in
some of the 20th century's
most iconic buildings.
From his pioneering use of
technology to the dozens of
awe-inspiring sites that
bear his signature style to
his public service as a
citizen artist through his
work with Turnaround Arts,
Frank Gehry has proven
himself an exemplar scholar
of American innovation.
(applause)
Margaret Heafield Hamilton.
A pioneer in technology,
Margaret Hamilton defined
new forms of software
engineering and helped
launch an industry that
would forever change
human history.
Her software architecture
led to giant leaps for
humankind, writing the code
that helped America set foot
on the moon.
She broke barriers in
founding her own software
businesses, revolutionizing
an industry and inspiring
countless women to
participate in STEM fields.
Her love of exploration and
innovation are the source
code of the American spirit,
and her genius has inspired
generations to
reach for the stars.
(applause)
Thomas J. Hanks.
Throughout a distinguished
film career, Tom Hanks has
revealed the character of
America, as well as his own.
Portraying war heroes, an
astronaut, a ship captain, a
cartoon cowboy, a young man
growing up too fast, and
dozens of others, he's
allowed us to see ourselves
-- not only as we are,
but as we aspire to be.
On screen and off, Tom Hanks
has honored the sacrifices
of those who have served our
Nation, called on us all to
think big and to believe,
and inspired a new
generation of young people
to reach for the sky.
(laughter and applause)
Deborah Murray, accepting on
behalf of her great aunt,
Grace Murray Hopper.
(applause)
As a child who loved
disassembling alarm clocks,
Rear Admiral Grace Murray
Hopper found her calling early.
A Vassar alumna with a Ph.D.
in mathematics from Yale,
Hopper served in the Navy
during World War II,
becoming one of the first
programmers in
early computing.
Known today as the "Queen of
Code," Grace Hopper's work
helped make the coding
language more practical
and accessible.
She invented the first
compiler, or translator, a
fundamental element of
our now digital world.
"Amazing Grace" was
committed to making the
language of computer
programming more universal.
Today, we honor her
contributions to computer
science and the sense of
possibility she inspired in
generations of young people.
(applause)
Michael J. Jordan.
(laughter and applause)
Powered by a drive to
compete that earned him
every major award in
basketball, including six
NBA championships, five Most
Valuable Player awards, and
two gold medals, Michael
Jordan has a name that's
become a synonym
for excellence.
His wagging tongue and
high-flying dunks redefined
the game, making him a
global superstar whose
impact transcended
basketball and shaped our
Nation's broader culture.
From the courts in
Wilmington, Chapel Hill, and
Chicago to the owner's suite
he occupies today, his life
and example have inspired
millions of Americans to
strive to "Be Like Mike."
(applause)
Maya Y. Lin.
Boldly challenging our
understanding of the world,
Maya Lin's designs have
brought people of all walks
of life together in
spirits of remembrance,
introspection, and humility.
The manipulation of natural
terrain and topography
within her works inspires us
to bridge our differences
and recognize the gravity of
our collective existence.
Her pieces have changed the
landscape of our country and
influenced the dialogue of
our society -- never more
profoundly than with her
tribute to the Americans who
fell in Vietnam by cutting
a wound into the Earth to
create a sacred place of
healing in our
Nation's capital.
(applause)
Lorne Michaels.
One of the most
transformative entertainment
figures of our time, Lorne
Michaels followed his dreams
to New York City, where he
created a sketch show that
brought satire, wits, and
modern comedy to homes
around the world.
Under his meticulous command
as executive producer,
"Saturday Night Live" has
entertained audiences across
generations, reflecting --
and shaping -- critical
elements of our cultural,
political, and national life.
Lorne Michaels' creative
legacy stretches into
late-night television,
sitcoms, and the big screen,
making us laugh, challenging
us to think, and raising the
bar for those who follow.
As one of his show's
signature characters would
say, "Well, isn't
that special?"
(laughter and applause)
Newton N. Minow.
(applause)
As a soldier, counsel to
the Governor of Illinois,
Chairman of the Federal
Communications Commission,
and law clerk to the Chief
Justice of the Supreme
Court, Newton Minow's career
has been defined by his
devotion to others.
Deeply committed to his
family, the law, and the
American people, his
dedication to serving and
empowering the public is
reflected in his efforts to
ensure that broadcast media
educates and provides
opportunity for all.
Challenging the media to
better serve their viewers,
his staunch commitment to
the power of ideas and
information has transformed
telecommunications and its
influential role
in our society.
(applause)
Dr. Eduardo J. Padrn.
As a teenage refugee from
Cuba, Eduardo Padrn came to
the United States to pursue
the American Dream, and he
has spent his life making
that dream real for others.
As president of the
community college he once
attended, his thoughtful
leadership and commitment to
education have transformed
Miami Dade College into one
of the premier learning
institutions in the country,
earning him praise
around the world.
His personal story and
lasting professional
influence prove that success
need not be determined by
our background, but by our
dedication to others and our
passion for creating America
that is as inclusive as it
is prosperous.
(applause)
Robert Redford.
Robert Redford has
captivated audiences from
both sides of the camera
through entertaining motion
pictures that often explore
vital social, political, and
historical themes.
His lifelong advocacy on
behalf of preserving our
environment will prove as
an enduring legacy as his
award-winning films, as will
his pioneering support for
independent filmmakers
across America.
His art and activism
continue to shape our
Nation's cultural heritage,
inspiring millions to laugh,
cry, think, and change.
(applause)
Diana Ross.
(laughter and applause)
A daughter of Detroit, Diana
Ross helped create the sound
of Motown with
her iconic voice.
From her groundbreaking work
with The Supremes to a solo
career that has spanned
decades, she has influenced
generations of young artists
and shaped our Nation's
musical landscape.
In addition to a GRAMMY
Lifetime Achievement Award
and countless musical
accolades, Diana Ross has
distinguished herself as
an actor, earning an Oscar
nomination and a
Golden Globe Award.
With over 25 albums,
unforgettable hit singles,
and live performances that
continue to captivate
audiences around the world,
Diana Ross still
reigns supreme.
(applause)
Next up, Vin Scully.
(laughter and applause)
With a voice that
transcended a sport and
transformed a profession,
Vin Scully narrated
America's pastime for
generations of fans.
Known to millions as the
soundtrack of summer, he
found time to teach us
about life and love while
chronicling routine plays
and historic heroics.
In victory and in defeat,
his colorful accounts
reverberated through the
bleachers, across the
airwaves, and into our
homes and imaginations.
He is an American treasure
and a beloved storyteller,
and our country's gratitude
for Vin Scully is as
profound as his
love for the game.
(applause)
Bruce F. Springsteen.
As a songwriter, a
humanitarian, America's Rock
and Roll laureate, and
New Jersey's greatest
ambassador, Bruce
Springsteen is, quite
simply, The Boss.
(laughter)
Through stories about
ordinary people, from
Vietnam veterans to steel
workers, his songs capture
the pain and the promise of
the American experience.
With his legendary E Street
Band, Bruce Springsteen
leaves everything on stage
in epic, communal live
performances that have
rocked audiences for decades.
With empathy and honesty, he
holds up a mirror to who we
are -- as Americans chasing
our dreams, and as human
beings trying to
do the right thing.
There's a place for everyone
in Bruce
Springsteen's America.
(applause)
Cicely Tyson.
For sixty years, Cicely
Tyson has graced the screen
and the stage, enlightening
us with her groundbreaking
characters and calls to
conscience, humility, and hope.
Her achievements as an
actor, her devotion to her
faith, and her commitment to
advancing equality for all
Americans-especially women
of color -- have touched
audiences of multiple
generations.
From "The Autobiography
of Miss Jane Pittman," to
"Sounder," to "The Trip to
Bountiful," Cicely Tyson's
performances illuminate the
character of our people and
the extraordinary
possibilities of America.
(applause)
The President: So, just on a
personal note, part of the
reason that these events are
so special to me is because
everybody on this stage
has touched me in a very
powerful, personal way --
in ways that they probably
couldn't imagine.
Whether it was having been
inspired by a song, or a
game, or a story, or a film,
or a monument, or in the
case of Newt Minow
introducing me to Michelle --
(laughter)
-- these are folks who have
helped make me who I am and
think about my presidency,
and what also makes them
special is, this is America.
And it's useful when you
think about this incredible
collection of people to
realize that this is what
makes us the greatest
nation on Earth.
Not because of what we --
(applause)
Not because of our
differences, but because, in
our difference, we find
something common to share.
And what a glorious
thing that is.
What a great gift
that is to America.
So I want all of you
to enjoy the wonderful
reception that will be
taking place afterwards.
Michelle and I have to get
back to work, unfortunately,
but I hear the food
is pretty good.
(laughter)
And I would like all of you
to give one big rousing
round of applause to our
2016 honorees for the
Presidential
Medal of Freedom.
Give it up.
(applause)